[Music]
and the academy award
on the 27th of february 2017
thanks to an ill-fated envelope mixer
for best picture
academy awards history was made la land
not only was the wrong winner for best
picture announced
live on television but it was the
culmination of one of the tightest
competitions in academy awards history
with two very different films considered
the front runners
for the most coveted award of the night
in one corner damien chazelle's musical
ode to the magic of hollywood
and white men who really like jazz very
very exciting and in the other
moonlights the self-proclaimed story of
a lifetime
directed by emerging filmmaker barry
jenkins
la la land offered voters a return to
the past
to the heyday of classical hollywood
where musicals
films about hollywood and most crucially
films about white people
dominated cinema whereas moonlight
offered a look towards the future where
a small
independent film considered art house by
oscar standards
could win the biggest award of the year
there's a mistake
moonlight you guys won best picture the
film did
just that in a shocking twist
moonlight went from film festival
favorite to a household name overnight
surprising even the director very
clearly
even in my dreams this could not be true
but how did this
man director barry jenkins go from
making one feature film
the low budget indie medicine for
melancholy to here
oh my goodness how did he go from being
a voracious lover of film
yes yes yes
to a master chronicler of black love on
screen
[Music]
even in his first film the lo-fi student
project
my josephine barry jenkins storytelling
philosophy
was evident filmed just two years after
9 11
the short follows adid and adela who
worked together in a dry cleaners
adidas and adela clean us flags for
their customers
free of charge like all of his films
it's a character study it's about love
and it's about people of color
and their place in the us
coffee just like my josephine
jenkins feature debut medicine for
melancholy was made
on a tiny budget but once again
jenkins interests as a director continue
to emerge and take
shape in the film never given an
official cinema release in the uk
medicine for melancholy follows mika and
joe two bay area residents
who after one night stand spend the
following day
tentatively getting to know each other
the film's cinematography makes a
distinct impression
it's shot in muted colors that are
almost faded to black and white
with the extreme close-ups that would
soon become a trademark of jenkins films
[Music]
this was the first feature collaboration
between jenkins and his cinematographer
james laxton
a medicine for melancholy showed the
pair's unique visual style
and the synergy that would continue into
their later work
the film is highly influenced by the
work of french director claire denis
who jenkins cites as his biggest
influence and favourite filmmaker
medicine for melancholy is a clear
homage to her film vondra di soir
which as well as having those intimate
extreme close-ups
also looks at a couple having a one
night stand
[Music]
jenkins even pays tribute to one of
claire denise long time collaborators
the haunting chamber pop band tinder
stixx by using one of their songs on the
medicine for melancholy soundtrack
referencing a filmmaker like denis feels
like a statement of intent
jenkins is positioning his work as part
of a cosmopolitan cinematic tradition
with its roots in european cinema
but it wasn't until eight years later
that jenkins made his second feature
the beautiful coming of age tale
moonlight
compared to medicine for melancholy this
was a story told on a much bigger canvas
with a high profile cast of stars
including
mahershala ali naomi harris and pop star
janelle monae
as well as promising newcomers alex
hibbert ashton sanders
and travonto rhodes who all take on the
lead role of charon
a man struggling with his identity
across three key
stages of his life
and even for those not swayed by star
power
it was impossible not to be swept up in
the beauty of moonlight cinematography
the latest collaboration between jenkins
and laxton
moonlight also wears its cinematic
influences on its sleeve
these include the films jenkins fell in
love with at college
such as the work of director juan carl
wai who he specifically references
throughout the film
[Music]
jenkins was also influenced by directors
whose work he discovered as a film
programmer
such as khalil joseph and his heightened
hyper real depiction of black life
in the music video until the quiet comes
[Music]
music is a key part of moonlight
with the film covering three specific
periods of chiron's life
so much is subtly suggested rather than
explicitly told
through the music jenkins uses in the
film
showroom goes from an innocent dancing
child
to a man who has rebuilt himself as a
drug dealer with a tough demeanor
listening to chopped and screwed hip-hop
in contrast to this his love interest
kevin fondly remembers their connection
through a soulful love song
hello
moonlight also manages to be two things
specific
and universal black audiences are
starved for representation
both on and off screen but here jenkins
a black filmmaker makes a film for and
about
black people in a world where coming of
age films
is so often told from the perspective of
straight
white teens jenkins instead tells a
black
queer working class coming of age story
you don't even know well the film does
show
charon's emotional journey to come to
terms with his identity
jenkins avoids the cinematic conventions
other filmmakers often fall into such as
sensationalizing and sentimentalizing
black pain as in lee daniel's precious
nobody loves me i wish i knew how to
quit you
or as in anglies brokeback mountain
ending a queer relationship
with compromise and tragedy
instead moonlight is a film that's all
about
love sharon is taken in by nurturing
surrogate parents juan and teresa
when his mother is unable to care for
him you know talk much but you damn
sugary
that's all right baby you ain't got to
talk to you get good and ready
and towards the end of the film
heartbreaking steps are made to heal the
bond between parent and child
so you ain't gonna love me
but you won't know that i love you you
hear me sharon
[Music]
like any good coming of age story
moonlight captured its audience's hearts
because it was universal
even old white academy voters were able
to relate to this story
there was a time when i thought this
movie was impossible
because i couldn't i couldn't bring it
to fruition i couldn't bring myself to
tell another story
which takes us back to that historic
oscar night
what do you do after your film wins best
picture
in jenkins case he turned away from film
and directed an episode of the satirical
comedy drama series
dear white people are you student here
what
jenkins episode of the show proved to be
its most pivotal
and provocative tackling the hot button
topic
of police prejudice i'm gonna need to
see your id
why you need to see my id son what
begins for a group of black friends
on a college campus as just another
saturday night at a party
quickly turns into the stuff of
nightmares
i said show me some id no he's a student
he's a student
i'll be seeing you around his return to
cinema
with 2018's if beale street could talk
would elaborate on these issues further
looking at the prison industrial complex
through the words of pioneering
african-american author
james baldwin it is not possible to run
from orchard to bank street
particularly not with the police behind
you yet officer bell
swears he saw fanny run from the scene
of the crime
this is only possible if officer bell
were off duty for his beat is on the
west side
not the east and yet it is now up to the
accused to prove and pay for proving
the irregularity and improbability of
this sequence of events
if beale street could talk followed raul
peck's galvanizing 2016 documentary
i am not your negro which drew a direct
line between baldwin's eloquent
statements
and the modern day struggles of black
people in america if any white man in
the world
says give me liberty or give me death
the entire white world applauds
when a black man says exactly the same
thing
he has judged a criminal and treated
like one
you ready for this i never been more
ready for anything in my home
but beale street was the first film
adaptation of baldwin's fiction
made with the full permission of
baldwin's estate
the film follows star-crossed young
lovers tish and funny
who are cruelly separated after fonni is
wrongfully imprisoned for a crime he did
not
commit hey
hey and then to make matters even more
complicated
we're gonna have a baby tish finds out
she's pregnant
again jenkins takes heavy
thought-provoking subject matter
in this case racism prejudice and the
prison system
[Music]
but weaves it into a story all about
love
[Music]
in moonlight chiron can't see the love
that his biological
and adopted family have for him but
in beale streets tish and funny are
fueled even in their dire circumstances
by the love they have for each other i
love you
i love you too and the love and support
of their families
well mostly i always knew you'd be the
destruction of my son
once again jenkins and laxton
collaborated on the cinematography for
this film
taking it in a different direction too
medicine for melancholies washed out san
francisco
and moonlight's piercing blue filtered
miami
in beale street they use lush primary
colors
to capture new york
and the film is reminiscent not just in
color palettes
but also in plot to jack demi's the
umbrellas of sherborg
another primary coloured love story of
young lovers tragically separated by a
cruel twist of fate
i love this movie there's just too much
good cinema here even now as an academy
award-winning a-lister
jenkins is still the eternal film
student
always ready to rhapsodize about a film
or filmmaker he loves
foundational foundational jenkins brings
together
all those international influences to
tell
uniquely american stories black american
stories and above all else transcendent
stories about black
love
you